.. _Nirvikalpa:

The MIDL practice of Nirvikalpa Samadhi (allowing stillness) leading to Nirodha Sampatti
============================================================================================================

Introduction
-------------
The MIDL system is created and taught by an Australian teacher Stephen Procter. I am an MIDL practitioner (as well as a TMI and Jhana practitioner). I do not have any kind of authorization, explicit or tacit permission to represent the MIDL system. I write about it purely as a student and practitioner. I write from my own experience using language which I find suitable for myself. Perhaps at times inadvertently misrepresenting the system. I write as if I were giving instructions because it is an easier writing style. I am not a teacher. **Caveat Emptor**.

In my writing below I have, in places, strayed away from the very well designed instruction set in the MIDL system simply to stay true to how the practice works for me. The operating principles do not change but I have done some limited degree of personalization in terms of raw instructions as well as descriptive language to better suit my own understanding and conceptual framing. The best way to learn the original exercises are directly from the source. I have linked some resources below.

About Nirvikalpa Samadhi
--------------------------
Samadhi is to bring the mind together, completely unified. When done using attention placed and held upon a single object - a choice is made between the myriad objects tumbling around in awareness. Thus making it vikalpa samadhi or samadhi based upon choice or selection of one thing. This kind of samadhi is characterized by attention paid to, and thus a subject-object relationship with, that object. The choice of the object gives rise to the emergence of a sense of a meditator who has made that choice and is thus paying attention to that object.

When done by attenuating and finally dissolving attention leading to no subject-object relationship, no choice being made, its called nirvikalpa samadhi. It can also be called choice-less awareness. The experience that is sometimes called resting in vast, spacious, luminous, bright awareness. The description is evocative but flawed. In nirvikalpa samadhi vastness, spaciousness, luminosity, brightness, clarity are all adjectives that themselves are conceptual objects floating around in awareness with relatively less conceptual objects like itches, aches, pains, doors slamming, smells and tastes. Nirvikalpa samadhi has awareness containing all possible objects and thus has no characteristics of its own. Its only characteristic is that there is awareness. A phenomenological category in and by itself!

Any characteristic used as a descriptor can only be used to motivate, they cannot guide one to this samadhi state. The only way to get there is to pick up a well crafted instruction set and simply apply one's self till one realizes this samadhi state. Upon realization of this state, there is no 'self' but yet conventional language has its uses and prevents us from spewing gobbledygook. Thus conventional language it is. 'I' realize this samadhi state, 'you' realize this samadhi state, 'we' realize this samadhi state :) :). I will try to talk about it using only the instruction set and what it delivers, thereby minimizing poetic metaphor to the extent possible.

The raw mechanics of practice
---------------------------------------
A. **Preparation**

    1. Lie down in shavasana or the corpse position. Supine on your back, arms at your side. This is going to take some time, so be comfortable. Try not to fall asleep. If you think it might be possible that you may catch a quick nap unbeknownst to yourself - sit up straight, or stand up.
    2. Place attention on the tactile sensations of the breath (from nostrils, to the chest, to the diaphragm, to the abdomen) - knowing the in-breath and the out-breath. Concentration is not the goal, the objective is to bring mindfulness to the fore. To hold the knowledge of the characteristic quality of breath in short term working memory as it happens - in versus out, soft versus harsh, smooth versus choppy, long versus short. Using investigation or deep curiosity as a support for mindfulness. Gradually building a memory bank of impressions about the breath. Thereby, in some time, for any given breath simply knowing how the current breath is, in terms of its characteristic quality, as compared to the collected impressions. This without any kind of discursive thought or deliberative evaluation about the breath.
    3. Let go of the breath and for brief periods of time keep changing the scope of attention shifting between each sense door in turns. Getting a sense of what it means to have body sensations, sounds, smells, tastes, vision (open your eyes for this in case closed - and then close them again), thoughts - emotions - mental states. Take your time.
    4. With mindfulness and investigation thus warmed up, bring your attention back to the breath
    5. With each in-breath relax the body, with each out-breath relax the body. Start with major muscles groups independently and then move on to relaxing the body on the in-breath and the out-breath at an aggregate level. Consider the body to be a lump of clay that is animated by the mind. The body relaxes when you relax the mind. Move on to relaxing the mind on the in-breath and relaxing the mind on the out-breath. The mind is multifaceted. When you approach the mind through the relaxation of the body, it is the emotional facet of the mind that is being relaxed. Relax the emotional mind on the in-breath, relax the emotional mind on the out-breath. The emotional mind in turn is agitated by the conceptual cognizing mind. Relax the conceptual mind on the in-breath, relax the conceptual mind on the out-breath.
    6. With tranquility thus established work on increasing the sensitivity of awareness to each sense door. For this purpose place attention on any point of contact - one of your palms touching the floor or the yoga mat for example. With attention on the point of contact go sense door by sense door and make sure that awareness is sensitive to data coming in through the sense door. Initially attention may move to the sense door, gently bring it back to the touch of the palm and begin again. Eventually move on to including multiple and then all sense doors at once. Attention firmly placed upon the touch of the palm on the floor and awareness very very sensitive.
    7. Sensitivity or sensory clarity in awareness is a facet of virya or energy. Keep balancing tranquility and energy like a titration experiment in a chemistry lab
    8. The end result of this exercise is that you are deeply mindful, very very curious about what's happening in the mind - the contents as well as the processing of the contents, Very very relaxed and yet deeply receptive to all sense doors including the mind

**Notes:** *Attention can be considered as one particular configuration of awareness. The mind 'knows' that which it receives through awareness, attention is awareness selecting a subset of the objects in awareness. The objects in attention get a foreground (vs background) like effect. Everything that we take relatively additional interest in comes to the foreground. This is accompanied by a clear subject-object relationship. This subject-object relationship can be intentionally formed, but is often formed habitually as scanning the environment or is a result of compulsion driven by vedana (valence) of and trishna (thirst) towards any particular object or sense contact. The preparatory training of establishing mindfulness, tranquility and energy sets the stage for eliminating the attentional subject-object configuration of awareness*

B. **Softening into thereby withdrawing the claim of ownership on conscious experience**

I have described the 'softening into technique in detail with links to guided meditations within :ref:`this <softening>` post.

**Notes:** *The softening into technique involves keeping the current object of attention intact in attention without rejecting it, pushing it away or trying to substitute it. It uses the natural relaxation of the body to teach the mind how to relax in the face of any and every contact. To stop grasping at objects, effectively greatly reducing trishna or thirst towards the object in the moment and create a temporary stillness of the mind towards the object as opposed to moving towards or away from it. Persistently practicing softening into leads to an increased potential to be still in the face of individual objects, of compound objects, of sense doors and eventually the entirety of conscious experience. It is the act of putting down a mental load equivalent to putting down a heavy physical load carried on the shoulders.*

*The end effect of softening into is to experience a withdrawal of the claim of ownership on conscious experience in its entirety. This is mine, or this is not mine. This is happening to me, or this is not happening to me - they are both two sides of the same coin. They both presuppose a 'me'. this me comes about through the habitual tendency of the mind to lay a claim on experience - be it an object , a sense door, or all of experience together*

C. **Nirvikalpa Samadhi - Allowing stillness**

    1. Beginning with building mindfulness, relaxation and energy
    2. Going to softening into experience as it arises and comes to the foreground. Permitting objects to self select rather than deliberately choosing objects
    3. Keep softening into contact at each sense door and eventually softening into the sense door itself. Letting go, putting down, softening into, withdrawing the claim of ownership on all of conscious experience
    4. Eventually attention simply wont land on any object. At this point start softening into the need to pay attention. Withdraw energy from the need to form a subject-object relationship. Drop the effort needed to lay a claim on conscious experience. Slowly gently using the relaxation of the body on the outbreath to simply suck out the tiny amount of effort that goes into that claim of ownership
    5. It is a game of patience and repetition of technique
    6. Nirvikalpa samadhi gets established through patience and perseverance. The attentional mode of awareness completely subsides and is replaced by very very sensitive awareness aware of all sense doors, all at once.
    7. This is a state of choice-less awareness
    8. In this state as you stay for a while, all contact arises undifferentiated, unengaged with by awareness. You will be very aware but there will be no 'you', there will only be awareness and awareness does not participate in its contents, it does not create vichara and vitarka - thought and evaluation. It does not create karma.
    9. Further dropping the effort to be aware of objects - awareness takes itself as an object and at this point shows up a fork in the road in terms of further development
    10. **Path 1** - With awareness having taken itself as an object, now there is a chosen object but there is no chooser, there is no subject. Objects still exist in awareness but they are very wispy and almost unnoticeable. Almost as if they aren't there. To withdraw the ownership of the act of being aware, to soften into awareness itself, to drop the effort needed to be aware leads to a **Nirodha Sampatti**. The attainment of cessation. A concentration induced cessation
    11. **Path 2** - With awareness having taken itself as an object, a great degree of comfort and pleasantness arises. A comfort and pleasantness that you aren't greedy for, you don't grasp at. But you can intentionally decide to encourage it. Awareness conjoins the experience of being aware of itself and the associated comfort, softness, niceness, pleasantness and generates a nimitta. This nimitta in its presentation is precisely like the breath nimitta. A tiny, sharp but intensely bright point source completely awe inspiring, arises as if it is in the visual field. But it is a purely mind generated object that represents the niceness and comfort in nirvikalpa samadhi and not the breath. Awareness can take this as an object, absorb into it and enter the jhanas.

**Notes:**

*The point of Nirvikalpa samadhi establishing, where awareness is truly choice-less and the attention based subject object paradigm is completely gone is a hugely relaxing and rejuvenating experience. It heals traumas, busts anxiety and clears up depression. This has to be done on a very regular basis and some time has to be given to it in order to heal a mind that is hurt.*

*This way of pulling off a Nirodha Sampatti is for me very very clear and reliably repeatable. Doing it within the jhanas is iffy. Also the conceptual paradigm is very simple. Withdraw the claim of ownership on objects, Withdraw the claim of ownership on conscious experience, Withdraw the claim of ownership on awareness itself and drop into a Nirodha Sampatti. A smooth slippery waterpark slide - straight line drop into a Nirodha Sampatti.*

*This way of doing the jhanas is qualitatively very different than using the breath nimitta. It is absolutely effortless. I have no idea what 'Advait' or 'non-dual' means conceptually - or rather I don't have any rigor in this philosophy. I have no grounding in that kind of practice. But the term that comes to mind is Non-dual jhana practice. Absolutely majestic.*

*Nirvikalpa samadhi is comparable to Savikalpa Samadhi or concentration with an object in terms of the rapidity with which it builds shamatha and ekagrata. But unlike Nirvikalpa samadhi, Savikalpa samadhi, moving onto or conjoined with Vipashyana, by its very nature affords investigation into the conditionality of phenomena. A leads to B leads to C leads to D ... and D sucks ... therefore teach the mind not to do A. Such a conditional investigation based wisdom aspect is missing from Nirvikalpa samadhi practice. In and by itself to me, it doesn't seem like a complete wisdom building practice. But in conversation with Stephen Procter I understood that the act of doing this straight inclined drop into a Nirodha Sampatti is also a wisdom practice. Today I look at it as the Uber relinquishment of ownership. It has the quality of completely letting go of the world and the conditional self that arises within this world. In a sense it is the true maturity of the spirit of renunciation. And it has absolutely nothing to do with this relative world of Lamborghinis and Begging Bowls. In the absolute world of perception and apperception - everything is dropped. Everything is renounced and it is an embrace of death and the deathless, the unborn! Yes I had committed to avoid poetry ... I know. Sigh!*

*In a particular way, Nirvikalpa samadhi affords investigation of conditionality. As skill in Nirvikalpa samadhi is immature at the beginning, the simpler, open, choice-less configuration of awareness will keep breaking down and settle into a habitual harsh attention based subject-object configuration. Every time a mosquito bites you on the ass or the elbow - depending on position and state of undress, or a door slams or a disturbing memory arises - the mind moves back into a mode where 'you' take birth against sense contact. Roop and Naam, Vedana, Pratitya Samutpad (DO), everything can be investigated. But this investigation rather than being deliberate and planned is opportunistic. It comes about through the failure mode of the Nirvikalpa Samadhi instruction set.*

Resources
-------------
**For practitioners**

`Mindfulness of knowing - part 1 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-4952-mindfulness-of-knowing-pt1>`_

    1. MIDL practice of allowing stillness - Guided meditations: `link1 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-3952-softening-into-stillness>`_, `link2 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-4052-stillness-in-body>`_, `link3 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-4152-stillness-in-mind>`_, `link4 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-4252-allowing-stillness>`_, `link5 <https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-mindfulness-training-5052-calming-mental-activity>`_
    2. The MIDL map of skill masteries including that of nirvikalpa samadhi is available here:`midl1 <https://midlmeditation.com/midl-meditation-system>`_, `midl2 <https://midlmeditation.com.au/insight-meditation-menu#8dc92b43-b0f0-4c4e-9681-f24adbc3744b>`_, `midl3 <https://midlmeditation.com.au/insight-meditation-24-27>`_

**For the exceptionally geeky and the patiently bold**

    1. Patanjali's `Yoga sutra <https://www.arlingtoncenter.org/Sanskrit-English.pdf>`_ as translated by Chip Hartnaft. Of particular interest are verses 1.12 to 1.24 and 1.41 to 1.51. I include this as a curio rather than a serious resource. Patanjali and therefore Hartnaft are slightly poetic for my taste. I personally prefer user / maintenance manuals for food processors and washing machines
    2. For the exceptionally geeky. Uncle Patanjali's Yoga Sutras, with commentary by Uncle Veda Vyasa and Notes by Uncle Vachaspati Misra - All of this heavy duty sanskrit translated into English in 1907 by Uncle Ganganatha Jha (Professor of Sanskrit) available `here <http://universaltheosophy.com/pdf-library/Yoga%20Darshana%20Eng%20with%20Vyasa%20Bhashya%20&%20Notes%20-%20Ganganath%20Jha%201907.pdf>`_. I have not yet mustered the courage to plow through this, but intend to some day. Again, included as a curio.


In conclusion
--------------------------

Thank you for reading. Any and every comment is welcome. Those that come from **direct experience** or the **aspiration for direct experience** are ------ ever so slightly, very very slightly, minisculely slightly, imperceptibly slightly, nanoscopically slightly, teensy weensily slightly, Lilliputianly slightly, itty-bittily slightly ------ more welcome than those that come from textual scholarship.
