.. _POI3:

Progress of Insight Part 3 - Dukkha
======================================================
This the third and final part of a series. The initial parts can be read here: Part 1, Part 2

I had written this series with the following objectives:

    1. Part 1 - To lay out the Progress of Insight map - explaining how it is based on the sequence of Anitya, Dukkha, Anatma
    2. Part 2 - To provide vipashyana exercises that strengthen the insight into Anatma which can be developed to an extent that it prevents the horribleness of dukkha from spilling over into daily life
    3. Part 3 - This part, to give pointers on how to gain the 'knowledges' of suffering and thus move on rather than simply hanging out in suffering for weeks, maybe months. I had initially written about it in this post here, but I wanted to elaborate on the same in case it helps someone

I use some terminology, practices in this post which I had written about in the previous parts. Please do read the previous parts. I am not a teacher, I am not an expert on understanding where other people may be in their practice and explaining stuff appropriately. I fully assume that the reader uses the highest standards of looking out for their mental health when engaging with what I write here. Nothing that I write comes from textual scholarship. Its all written from direct experience. I have a sample size of one, just one! Caveat Emptor.

Introduction
----------------------------------------
When we train awareness to engage with object/s it starts to notice the underlying nature of objects and starts to engage with the characteristic of change. This uncovers the mind's own nature. The mind wants stability / reliability or 'nityata' but everything is anitya / anicca / unreliable. Anityata is not a characteristic of objects. Its the characteristic of the mind's engagement with objects. An engagement colored by the desire for reliability. Upon realizing anityata, the mind experiences Dukkha. A cognitive friction between that which is, as grokked by rationality, and that which is compulsively sought. Dukkha itself comes in multiple flavors - Fear, Misery, Disgust, and Get Me The Fuck Out Of Here. Each flavor of dukkha is supported by a mental posture or a 'grip'. If these grips are recognized experientially, they can be released thus releasing the mind from dukkha. These grips are common everyday experiences and they have names. But these names are linguistic metaphors wrapped around concepts that only represent the direct experience. But we don't have any other way of communicating ... so names it is!

In the previous post I had written about how one may go about looking for these grips (mental postures). Ideally experiential learning should involve discovering these grips and how to loosen them on one's own. A detailed guide may perhaps be a contrivance. But then everything about the awakening project is a contrivance. We find ourselves jumping on a trampoline or operating heavy machinery, we are asked to remove ourselves from such situations, sit down with a straight back, be aware of our left butt cheek and then be aware from our left butt cheek. We do really strange things actually. Each and every meditation exercise is a contrived structuring of awareness. Thus perhaps this particular methodology, contrived as it may be, may help someone working with the dukkha nanas.

**Why have I not experienced this horribleness?**

There are two possible reasons.

    1. You are the contemplative equivalent of Albert Einstein. Some geniuses are probably deeply sensitive to the mark of Anatma and gain insight into Anatma very early on. This is a natural flipping of the script that happens for those people. Other geniuses may simply apprehend dukkha, know what to do and move on, maybe in a couple of hours, minutes or perhaps mind moments. Spectacular Geniuses I say!!
    2. You are the contemplative equivalent of Forrest Gump. You gain only calm abiding and no insight. When we train awareness to engage with objects - whether using stable attention or using momentary concentration - shamatha or calm abiding is a natural outcome. To 'see' the characteristic of change and therefore unreliability and therefore dukkha as a result of grokking unreliability, requires at least some degree of innate talent. For you life is a box of chocolates as far as the awakening project goes :). But even Forrest Gump as compared to all sentient beings probably lies in the 99th percentile of talent. Thus sooner or later .. if you practice 'well' .. you will be in this territory! Whether it happens in this life or a hundred lives from now .. who knows!

Most of us lie somewhere between Albert and Forrest. But it is a spectrum! Maybe its a normal curve. I don't know!

The grips
----------------------------------------
    1. Expectations lead to Fear
    2. Dislike (animosity) leads to Misery
    3. Rejection (not me, not mine) leads to Disgust
    4. Separation (lack of intimacy with experience) leads to Get Me Out of Here!

Expectations, dislike, rejection, separation - these are terms that have evolved for the relative world of 'me' and 'you' and jobs, families, businesses, societies etc. In the absolute world of perception and apperception they are like mental postures or grips that color the results of awareness engaging with its objects. whether the object is a relatively simple object like an itch on the elbow or a relatively complex object like a noisy party - it doesn't matter. These grips exist and they are active. Their strength and thus their ability to color conscious experience is context specific in our lives. But in the awakening project when you come to the territory of the Dukkha Nanas - the context doesn't matter. You have uncovered the raw mechanisms through which conscious experience is created and are now full frontal - face to face - gonad to gonad - with these grips. These grips have to recognized. The mind has to be very very familiar with what these things are and learn to relax them again and again. They curl up and become hard - dukkha shows up, we relax them - dukkha reduces. We do this multiple times. We see the results of these grips, we see the results of relaxing them. This juxtaposition teaches the mind a new way of engaging with objects. This is the 'nana' in the dukkha nana. Else ... its just dukkha! And there is no end to it!

The method
----------------------------------------
    1. Bring to mind a memory of a time when you were afraid. Something simple. Like going unprepared for a viva voce exam. Going up on stage to do an extempore talk. Going to a social occasion when you know your ex is coming
    2. Recreate this memory entirely in your mind with as much detail and clarity as you can muster, immersing yourself back into the experience
    3. Feel the fear arise. If it doesn't arise, use your memory to construct the fear as well
    4. This memory is a compound object. Against this object can you find expectations in your mind. Do not try to discursively unravel what those expectations are but can you locate them with awareness within the sense door of the mind. This is a bit like putting your hand into a shoe box and feeling an object and recognizing that its a lego brick - without the visual detail
    5. Taking slow deep abdominal breaths - soften into the expectations, while looking straight at the memory ('softening into' is discussed in the previous part)
    6. Keep refreshing the memory, keep bringing back the fear, keep softening into, relaxing, putting down the expectations. You will notice fear dissolving - hopefully ... fingers crossed :)
    7. Initially even such a targeted exercise will be imprecise and clumsy. But if you are fully present, very very mindful - then as and when something clicks - you will notice it. What do expectations look like / feel like - in the mind. What does it mean to keep the memory / object in the foreground while softening into, relaxing, putting down expectations. These questions will have an answer in direct experience and it will be a very visceral kind of learning. There is nothing discursive about this exercise. Nothing conceptual except the 'object' that you used
    8. With the clarity of softening into expectations - work with other harsh memories a couple of times to solidify the learning
    9. Move to the sense door of the body. With the entire sense door in the foreground - soften into expectations. At this point the conceptual discursive meaning of the word expectations makes no sense whatsoever, it is now like the Lego brick in the shoe box. Or to use the analogy of mental posture or grip - against the sense door of the body, relax the grip of 'expectations'. Against each individual sensation as you track it within the sense door of the body, relax the grip. Against the characteristic of anitya in the body sensations - relax the grip
    10. Do the same for sounds, thoughts, emotions, mental states
    11. Come back to the domain of the highly conceptual. One by one bring to mind a pure mental object - an 'entity' something that has been created into a 'thing'. Bring to mind - Boss, wife, child, parent, friend, government, pandemic, 'me' - relax the grip
    12. Work with the following concepts - fame, infamy, profit, loss, victory, defeat - relax the grip
    13. At some point or the other - the mind will completely relax the grip of expectations - fear will dissolve - and then comes the next level boss - Misery!!!
    14. Adversarial-ness, not liking, 'vyapad' is the cause of misery. Do the above exercise to relax the grip of 'I don't like this' - and then comes disgust!
    15. Rejection of conscious experience is the cause of disgust. I have no expectations from conscious experience, I have no active dislike for conscious experience but then I have no acceptance either. I reject conscious experience. I keep saying stupid shit like 'Not me' ... 'Not mine'. This rejection presupposes that there is a 'me' for there to be a 'mine' or a 'not mine'. This rejection leads to disgust. Soften into, relax, put down, stop powering this grip and see the disgust dissolve into - next comes 'GET ME THE FUCK OUT OF HERE'
    16. Separation or lack of intimacy is the cause of this. Relax this grip of separation and cultivate great intimacy with all of conscious experience, go closer and closer to the object in attention, and to everything in awareness. Be very very intimate with conscious experience .... and pop into equanimity
    17. To have absolutely no expectations from objects, to have no dislike whatsoever, to have complete acceptance, and to be closely intimate. That is equanimity.
    18. No matter how many cessations you may have, you will keep returning again and again to Fear until you learn the lesson. Do not shoot aliens, do not slam shift anything. Go slowly, luxuriously. Fully present. This is like learning 16 different multiplication tables for the rest of your life. Its not about cramming for a test one night before the exam and getting through. For the rest of your life, if somebody wakes you up in the middle of the night with a slap on your face and asks you 7x16 - ? ... you must be able to come up with the answer .... at the drop of a hat!!! burnt into your memory !!! Else you might keep cycling.

Concluding notes
----------------------------------------
This project is about understanding Dukkha and overcoming it. This is a bear that has to be wrestled. When in this territory, to keep chugging onwards without a clear idea of what to do, and hassle one's self is not a good idea. At some point the mind will intuit what needs to be done, but there is no way of predicting when that will happen. It makes sense to learn from the whiplashes on other people's backs. Each and every skill, each methodology, technique I have suggested is vipashyana / shamatha. I strongly recommend that these skills be a part of your overall practice plan in order to deal with this and go toe to toe with dukkha as and when it is uncovered. Dealing with this territory maybe early on in your practice is a good thing because the entirety of the path after (and perhaps including) stream entry is essentially about recognizing these and other mental grips and loosening them, again and again until the mind learns not to operate with any grips whatsoever.

Can one live without expectations, without dislike, without rejection, without separation from any and every aspect of conscious experience? Whether its an itch on the ass, A job loss, A pandemic, A lottery win ... Short answer ... Yes! These are not intellectual abilities, these are mental postures, grips of the mind. You aren't losing your marbles! Upon releasing these grips you are permitting 'Bodhi' - Rational intelligence leaning upon experiential wisdom - to act. Un-polluted. Once fully free of these mental grips, Bodhi will take care of your well being. You will not need to be put on an IV drip and a ventilator inside a monastery. You - the solid Albert Einstein will not morph into a Forrest Gump. That is a myth. The more you resist relaxing these grips, the longer you will stay in this territory. Have the confidence that this is do-able. Awakening is not reserved for the hermits roaming around a forest eating wild potatoes. Awakening is your birth-right and awakening does not care whether you possess a Lamborghini or a begging bowl. Awakening is all about these grips. There are more of them ... you will see them all!

Thanks a lot for reading this. Any and every comment is welcome. Those that come from 'inner authority' and direct experience or the aspiration for inner authority and direct experience will be greeted with a loud cheer, a hurrah, exuberant bonhomie and an impromptu love ballad those that come from textual scholarship will be greeted with a very very very slight but mostly polite, welcoming and benevolent smile :) :) :) 