Notes on Stream Entry - 1
=============================
Stream Entry can be described in many ways. One helpful way of describing Stream Entry is the sinking in of the **experiential** fact that our experience of being conscious - all of it, the whole shebang is unreliable.

We have an expectation of reliability. This expectation of reliability is affirmed and strengthened by our intentional actions in terms of cognition, taking mental positions, verbal thoughts, attitudes, outlook, speech, outwardly behavior. Its a bit of a feedback loop. We expect reliability, we act in accordance with that expectation, we strengthen the expectation. The mind is tricky, in the university of hard knocks as we keep meeting a social presentation of unreliability and we keep getting disappointed we form newer and more updated mental models of what to expect from life and we then start to rely upon those. But those newer more updated mental models are also a part of our experience and they color our experience. What we are unable to grok is those mental models that get freshly created are also unreliable.

The world will always fuck me over, the world will sometimes fuck me over, the world will never fuck me over. All three of these mental positions are - mental positions, a part and parcel of our conscious experience, they too are unreliable. This is the supramundane aspect of SE, this has to be understood experientially. This comes about through meditation practice. It cannot, will not come about through listening to 'The True Dhamma'. whatever the fuck that means!It comes about through practice and practice alone. Some people are positioned in such a way in terms of innate skill set, life circumstances etc that 'practice' for them could be just a matter of a week, for others it could take an entire lifetime. Given the fact that we have been dealt the cards that we have been dealt with, it then makes a lot of sense to simply understand a little bit of theory, pick up a structured practice and just simply apply ourselves consistently within the constraints of our lives.

Over and above any structured practice, we need to bring in some degree of customization for our present constellation of circumstances. Practice itself provides the feedback necessary to make these customizations:

    1. We begin with a structured practice plan and we discover that we just simply cant consistently practice. Well take your current instruction set and just simply show up every day. Over a period of time looking at your schedule set a timer for 20 minutes, 30 minutes, 40 minutes - once maybe twice a day and simply execute your practice

    2. This consistency illuminates meditative hindrances. Dull? learn to brighten up **while doing your current practice**. Bored? learn to take interest in, build curiosity towards the practice and what it is pointing at in present experience **while doing your current practice**. Agitated? Learn to relax the body and mind as a separate skill and bring it into play **while doing your current practice**. Experiencing regret and remorse? learn to forgive yourself and others for things in the past as an additional practice .. and experience the stillness of the mind towards the past ... and bring this stillness into play **while doing your current practice**

    3. Feeling stagnated, feeling as if you can do more - make changes to your current practice, deepen concentration, if focused on vipassana in the body, learn to do it with sounds, learn to do it with thoughts feelings and emotions - supplement your current practice

In doing regular meditation practice - building skill sets and applying them towards structured experiences two avenues open up. these aren't avenues that you have to pursue by doing something special - these are avenues that are baked into the act of practicing:

    1. Specific conditionality - the interdependency of objects and events in various sense doors. Some sounds make us tense, some thoughts make us feel relaxed, relaxation in the body leads to relaxed mental states, agitation in mental states leads to tightness in the body

    2. The universal characteristic of anicca - unreliability - We start to see how objects change. Object can be sounds, thoughts, mental states, attitudes, a feeling of being under threat, a feeling of being safe, relaxation, agitation - anything and everything changes! We also start to see how we hold expectations from objects and that one of our core expectations is that we can predict how they behave and against this prediction is affective investment. We are invested in our prediction of success, we are invested in our prediction of failure, we are invested in our prediction of neutral outcomes. It is this investment that is seen to be a source of our regular discomfort and unease in meditation and in life. To see this enough number of times is to coax the mind, train the mind, convince the mind to give up! give up its investment in reliability.

And that's how stream entry happens. Does it follow a certain known pattern of phenomenology - Yes!!! Its called the PoI map. Yes there is something called cessation - bright clear awareness that has nothing within it to take as an object, the lokuttara citta taking nibbana as the object! Yes all of that happens and is how you gauge Stream Entry. These are the markers, signs of a practice that has lead to Stream Entry. It is a map!

But you cant make that map happen! You cant will a cessation to happen, You can't drop fetters, you can't challenge fetters, heck you can't even one fine day sit down and understand fetters - not in the way it matters! All you can do is practice well! Practice in a very structured methodical way - building skill upon skill, solving problem after problem, working through hindrance after hindrance, doing investigation after investigation. With enthusiasm, interest and a willingness to be methodical.

All of this begins with a well designed, structured, methodical practice - with you the yogi showing up everyday and cranking out a session or maybe two sessions. Reading suttas - Wont help! Attending dharma talks - Wont help! Reading books - Wont help! Spewing out MCTB - Wont help! Mala beads and incense sticks - wont help! Prostrations - Won't help! Spitting out TMI - Wont help! Pali pushing - Wont help! Sutta peddling - Wont help! Hero worshipping your favorite Ajahn, Sayadaw, Lama - Wont help! 'Following' your friendly neighbourhood Arhat - Wont help!

Daily consistent structured methodical practice Baby! There's no way around it!
