.. _AwakeningProjectPreface:

Preface
======================================
I came to The Awakening Project after an almost decade long struggle with depression and anxiety having tried traditional psychiatric medicines and psychotherapy (to a very limited extent). My awakening practice began with a system called MIDL created by a brilliant and greatly gifted Australian teacher - Stephen Procter. The MIDL system, at the time I started using it to learn, was hyper focused on investigation using the rubric of the Satipatthana sutra. Since then Stephen has updated the MIDL system to include concentration / stable attention practice and the jhanas. Within few weeks of beginning to practice, panic attacks had stopped, within a few months anxiety was gone, within approximately an year (or less) depression was gone. But I continued in order to get to the root of the problem. I had gotten my clock cleaned by Dukkha (suffering) and I had decided that I would get to the very root of the problem and fix it once and for all. Is there no self / no soul / nobody to do / nothing to do / nowhere to go - I had absolutely zero interest in nonsensical ideas like these. There was a problem, and I was going to solve it!

Once I had initially begun, in a matter of months I began to slip into deep concentration states called access concentration and the 1st jhana without conceptually understanding what these things are. On receiving advice from a few friends I began cultivating the jhanas in parallel to practicing MIDL using a book called Right Concentration (Leigh Brasington). I worked my way up to the 6th jhana and faced strange difficulties related to a strong imbalance between attention and awareness (sometimes called kundalini phenomena). I found myself in a state where restricting my attention to a simple scope like filling tax return forms or any other work related stuff would leave me with strong energetic phenomena going up and down my spine with orgasmic joy and an unbearable head pressure. The joy, the energetic phenomena and the head pressure would all remain in the background simply waiting for me to marshal my attentional resources intentionally to any tasks before making those simple tasks unbearable to do. It is difficult to accurately fill one's tax forms while in the middle of orgasmic delight :). At that point a friend recommended that I check out the book The Mind Illuminated written by Culadasa (Dr John Yates). The book very systematically teaches concentration skills from the ground up and I engaged with it in parallel to MIDL practice.

Continuing onwards with MIDL and TMI in parallel I reached Stream Entry - the first stage of awakening. From that point onwards I leveraged my MIDL and TMI skills and picked up the simple and powerful rubrics created by Siddharth Gautam to conduct a very systematic study of the mind. The study leading to knowledge, wisdom and dispassion. Knowledge of how the mind works to create suffering, wisdom regarding managing the mind to release it from suffering and dispassion towards the processes within the mind that need passion as a fuel to create suffering/ dukkha. This study very slowly but steadily leading to Sakadagami, Anagami, Arhatship. Full and complete freedom from suffering in stages as defined by Siddharth Gautam in a nifty little model called the Ten Fetter Model.

This book is my attempt at systematizing what I have learnt. I lean heavily on the concepts, the practices, the language, the representative models created by Stephen Procter, Culadasa, Siddharth Gautam. But everything I write here comes from my own direct experience and experience based knowledge in practice. Direct experience which I represent using words of my teachers and my own clumsy attempts at word smithy. This is an interactive book, that's why it is written as a series of reddit posts so that readers can interact with the writing, adding to it from their own experience and asking questions in support of their aspiration for direct experience. This book (and its co-creational commentary) in line with the principles of this subreddit has no place whatsoever for dogma, superstition, hero worship, textual scholarship.

About concepts
--------------------

**Resisting concepts**

Absolutely nothing theoretical about the Awakening Project makes sense unless it is practiced. On reading about a concept it has to become a hypothesis to be tested in direct experience. Each and every hy
pothesis is applicable only to direct experience, the interplay between perception and apperception which can be studied and within which the concepts and theoretical models make sense.

*Many years ago after having tried various different types of psychiatric medications I made my way to a MD Psychiatry who was also a qualified practicing therapist. She explained to me a system of therapy created by Uncle Albert Ellis called REBT (Rational Emotive Behavioral Therapy). the system postulates that we hold some very strong views regarding how we should interact with others and the world in general and in turn how others and the world should interact with us.*

*"I am a fair minded man, the world* **must** *be fair to me* .... **otherwise** *...."*

*In REBT such views are unofficially called 'must'urbations. Officially they are called irrational views. When told that my views were, or could be 'irrational' and I should change them .... I argued with the therapist for half an hour straight, telling her (in my rich imagination) that she was an idiot and so was Uncle Albert. I walked out of her office deciding never to return!!*

**In the Awakening project .... don't be like me!** Understand these concepts are hypotheses that help act as a vector for investigation and as rubrics for developing investigative skills.

**Embracing concepts**

Absolutely nothing theoretical about the Awakening Project is 'true'. The human being is not a tragic animal stuck in a world of hurt and suffering, the human being is not a soulless sentient intelligent robot programmed by past lives to play out its karma, the human being is not a collection of sense doors and aggregates and chains of phenomena and foundations of mindfulness and all that crap. Sometimes a human being is simply a slightly tipsy drunk and hungover dude waking up in the morning wondering why he got carried away with his friends and drank so much.

*After my first brush with REBT which displeased me greatly, I spent a few more years being solidly dildoed by depression and anxiety and wearily made my way back to the same therapist. This time closely listening to what she had to say about the therapy modality. And .... I ... got .... it!!! I understood everything there is to understand about 'must'urbations and how to free myself of them! In fact I understood so deeply that I was cured! I decided that I didn't really need to practice anything. I mean .... fuck! look at me! all cured and shit! It turns out that this is a documented event. When people accept the concepts of REBT for a short duration that intellectual understanding and embracing of the models feels so freeing, so relieving that they believe that they are cured. This is short lived.*

**In the Awakening project ... don't be like me!** Understand that there is absolutely no value in all of this unless it is used as rubrics for skill development and investigation. Understand that all concepts have only one purpose .... practice direction.

**Fetishizing concepts**

The conceptual models created by Uncle Sid and which I learnt from Stephen Procter and Culadasa and later through my own practice are powerful! They have the potential of becoming a new representation of reality and in that sense they might takeover your 'view'. This hijacking of the 'view' is in and by itself a powerful albeit temporary and completely unreliable relief from suffering. But it is an illusion. Everything in the Awakening Project has no basis as a philosophy or a permanent view of looking at the world or the human within it. It stand only and only as a basis for practice. The strange fetishization of what Uncle taught at Kapilavastu or to the Kalamas or the deep amount of fascination with Sayadaws and Llamas and Ajahns and Teachers and Acharyas and Gurus and the accumulation of incense sticks and mala beads and golden statues is ... cute. But it has no bearing whatsoever on the successful project management and execution of The Awakening Project. Concepts serve practice and practice is done with the aspiration for Awakening - full and complete understanding and thereafter freedom from suffering. The kind of understanding that can be explained to other people if at all one so desires.

In the Awakening project .... don't fetishize concepts!

**The base of the Isigili mountain**

I have invaded the base of the Isigili mountain and shooed out the Pratyeka Buddhas living here in order to create a space for this subreddit and this book within it :) Turns out they didn't really care! They have no more fucks left to give and were vastly amused by the invasion. But here at the base of the Isigili mountain we honor their spirit of individual achievement and we speak in their honor. We speak to each other from 'inner authority' and the direct experience from where it emerges. We also speak to each other from an **aspiration** for inner authority and direct experience . We do this, because we understand its value, and we don't want to piss off the Pratyeka dudes!

**Regarding negativity**

This practice, on which this book is based, has delivered results for 2600 years. Uncle once said, and I believe him on this point that the project can be completed in 7 days, 7 weeks, 7 months, or a maximum of 7 years if one were to apply themselves diligently. Be positive. Apply yourself within the constraints of your life and then let the chips land where they will. Don't be negative towards yourself or towards others pursuing awakening. Such negativity has karmic consequences within yourself and within others who don't guard themselves from your negativity. It creates and feeds samskaras (sankharas) mental constructs that in turn color, affect, construct lived experience and outcomes within lived experience. Full and complete awakening is possible in this very life. Possible does not mean guaranteed, but one never knows an outcome of a project unless one begins and sustains the practice needed to take the project to completion.

I hope this introduction appropriately sets the tone for the rest of the book.

